Here I have created a very simple robot out
of Lego. It's got simply one rotational joint
or one revolute joint. And the end effector
position of the robot can follow any point
around a circle if not particularly interesting
or particularly useful.
What we are interested in now is to describe
the pose of the end effector of this one joint
robot. The end effector is indicated by this
symbol here. We will recall from the earlier
lecture that when we want to describe the
pose of an object in two dimensions, we attach
a coordinate frame to it and the position
of the object is described by the position
of the origin of the coordinate frame and
the orientation of the object is described
by the angle between that coordinate frame
and the reference coordinate frame. I've indicated
here a reference coordinate frame with the
axis x and y.
The first thing we're going to do is to rotate
that coordinate frame by the angle Q1. That's
the joint angle of our 1 degree freedom robot.
So I'm going to apply a homogeneous transformation,
a rotation, by the angle Q1. And now I'm going
to translate the coordinate frame along the
link of the robot. So I'm now going to apply
a translation in the x direction. So the gray
coordinate frame shown here represents the
pose of the robot. We get to the end effector
coordinate frame by rotating and then translating
the reference coordinate frame. All these
transforms are in two dimensions. So we say
that they belong the set SE2. That's the set
of all translations and rotations in two dimensions.
Using what we learned in an earlier lecture,
I can expand this out. Then I can multiply
the two matrices together and I come up with
a single homogeneous transformation matrix
which describes the pose of the end effector.
The position of the end effector is given
by these two elements in three homogeneous
transformation matrix and I've written them
out here. And we can see that they describe
a set of points which lie on a circle of radius
A1.
So the position of the end effector is a function
of the joint angle Q1 and the orientation
of the end effector which is given by this
matrix here is also a function of Q1. So its
not possible for us to independently set the
position and the orientation of the robot.
There are just not enough joints or degrees
of freedom in a simple robot like this.
Let's look at doing this in MATLAB. I'm going
to define a couple of workspace variables
A1 which represents a length of the first
link and Q1 which represents the joint angle.
Now in order to determine the end effector
pose, I need to multiply together a couple
of elementary transformations.
An easier way to do this using the robot toolbox
is with the function called trchain2. It computes
the result of the chain of homogeneous transformations.
The first one in the chain rotation by Q1
and that's followed by a translation in the
x direction, that's along the link by a distance
A1. I just represent that as a string in MATLAB
and then I pass in the joint angle that I'm
interested in which is Q1 and here is the result.
What this is done is when the trchain2 is
executing, it looks of the variable A1 in
the workspace and it looks for the variable
Q1 as being the first element of the vector
that I passed in. A1 from the workspace. Q1
comes from the passed vector. Here is in numeric
form the 3x3 homogeneous transformation matrix
representing the pose of the end effector
of our simple one link robot.
Now I can do it using symbols instead of numbers.
And to do that invoke some functions from
MATLAB’s symbolic toolbox and I’m going
to say Q1 is a symbol and A1 is a symbol.
Now what I'm going to do is just repeat the
command that I did previously.
And what we had here is a symbolic representation
of the pose of the end effector; the same
as we worked out a slide ago. Another I can
do using the robotic's toolbox is to import
a model of a plainer one joint robot. I do
that with this function mdl_planar1 and we
created a new variable in that workspace;
variable called P1. You can see that it's
of a serial link of type. It's a robot manipulator
type object.
Now with this particular type object, it's
got a number of methods. An interesting method
is to teach method and if I invoke that, all
you see here is a graphical representation
of a one link robot and a simple teach pendant,
a single slider here. And as I adjust the
slider we see the robot move. I'm adjusting
the value of the first joint angle. What we
see here is the xy coordinate of the end effector
of the robot changing as I adjust each joint angle.